Did a nearby supernova trigger a burst
of rapid evolution?
Well, I'm talking about the period
around about 2.58
million years ago at the end of the
plyioene. The plyiosene was from 5.33 to
2.58 million years ago when life on
Earth wasn't so terribly different to
what it is today. But there were some
very significant changes that brought
that era to the end. And you can see the
timeline of some of the more recent
periods within uh history there with the
Neoene, the Catnian and their
subdivisions, the myosene, the plyiosene
and the pleaene. That's not confusing,
is it? Having those two near identical
words right next to each other and uh
further subdivisions there. And all
those are based on the mix of species
and fossils that we find
from those times. And the transitions
represent the disappearance of one set
of species and the appearance of others.
And 2.58
million years ago, a whole lot of the
marine megapora, the large aquatic
beasts, disappeared. And there was a
significant mutation rate spike creating
new species out of old ones at around
about the same time. And the hypothesis
here is that this was radiation from a
nearby supernova event that triggered it
off.
And so there were a group of researchers
from the University of Santa Cruz and
names listed there. I won't read them
all out for you. Who came out with some
very, very interesting results.
Well, they were looking at the deep
ocean floor and finding that when you
took cores and analyzed them for their
composition, looking for different
isotopes, different radioactive nuclei,
they found a spike, in fact, two spikes
of radioactive iron 60. You can see the
data across the top there. And there is
a little spike at about 2.5
million years ago and another smaller
one at about 6.3.
Well,
since these uh tend to suggest an origin
from these radioactive events in deep
space, we don't get iron 60 from any
known process on the earth. Iron 60, a
radioactive version of iron with four
extra neutrons, is formed in the
supernovi where there is a blizzard of
neutrons from the dying star. As it
explodes outwards, the neutrons hurl
themselves out through all the rest of
the material and stick to many, many
nuclei, building up the neutron count,
making heavier and heavier elements.
And for iron 60, what we find is that
with a halflife of around 2.6
million years, so very convenient for
the time scale that we're interested in
here,
the iron nucleus decays to a cobalt
nucleus.
One of the neutrons turns into a proton
as a result of capturing an electron.
And that changes it from the element
with 26 protons iron into cobalt with
27. And the number of neutrons goes down
by one.
That still is radioactive. And with a
much shorter halflife of just 5 years,
it turns into nickel 60 by the same
process. another neutron changes into a
proton and the uh result is that we end
up with 28 protons and 32 neutrons in
nickel 60. And so in about 2.6 million
years half of the iron that was present
originally will have decayed leaving us
with around about half. And so actually
the signal that we see is probably only
half the level that there was at the
time the sediments in the deep sea were
laid down.
Now, the sun is sat with its family of
planets and the earth inside a 1,000
lightyear wide void called the local
bubble, which seems to have been carved
out by a series of supernovi that went
off tens of millions of years ago,
pushing away the local gas. And it was
the compression waves caused by these
exploding stars that probably triggered
the solar nebula to begin its collapse
to form the sun and the planets.
Now, we've been moving through that
local bubble and we probably entered it
around 5 to 6 million years ago. And as
the sun came in bringing the earth with
it and all the other planets, we crossed
into the central region where the
density of material is now very low. But
around the rim of the bubble as we
entered the compressed shock wave from
those exploding supernovi that formed
the bubble in the first place would have
been much thicker and rich in those
radioactive isotopes. And so around that
5 to six million years ago, the earth
would have been bathed in that material.
And that probably explains the older of
the two pulses of iron 60. It's the
effect of the entering across the
boundary of the local bubble.
But our researchers heard about another
mystery which seemed to coincide in time
with the discoveries of the iron 60 in
the deep sea floor. And this was that a
burst of new virus formation seemed to
be being traced back to a a place in
East Africa and a time of around about 2
and a half million years ago.
Coincidentally, perhaps just the time
when uh the earliest form of the uh
human gene line Homohabilis was
beginning to stand up and walk the
savannah.
And in this area, we have Lake Tangana,
isolated by mountains along the East
African rift. It's the largest and
longest and deepest lake in Africa and
amazingly holds 16% of all the world's
available fresh water
and as such it seems to be rich in biod
diversity. It's got its own strange
ecosystem of creatures.
Now, samples taken from the lake bed
also revealed iron 60. And these 60
samples seem to date back to around
about that 2 1/2 million year time
frame.
What we seem to have detected is that at
that time radiation
caused a lot of mutations of DNA
triggering the changes in the viruses
making many new species and types of
virus and indeed triggering a
diversification of the fish population
in Lake Tangana. they all those cosmic
rays that were coming in the heavy
radioactive nuclei and so forth were
coming in and getting into the cells and
the viruses smashing the DNA causing
changes in the base pair organization
and triggering off many many new and
diverse species.
So this seems to align with this idea of
a 2.5 million year ago event.
We can also see over the whole world a
peak in the levels of ultra high energy
pael electron volt cosmic rays. And this
really all points to being a supernova
as the source. And it probably flooded
the earth with all these uh cosmic rays,
high energy radioactive nuclei traveling
at very very high speeds for a period of
about 100,000 years. This wasn't a short
sharp shock lasting days or months. This
was a bath for a 100,000 years in
duration. So the question for
astronomers is can we identify the
source?
Well, when we look out into space and we
look to see where the supernovi
responsible might have come from, there
are a couple of candidates that spring
to mind. One is the Scorpius Centurus
OB association of massive stars around
460 light years away. and another one,
the Takana herologicum
group around 230 light years away,
rather closer. And we have a graph here
at the bottom of the peak in the
supernovi
Iron 60 detection and the paths relative
to the sun of various groups of massive
stars. And you can see the alignment
that has been suggested there. If we
plot a line at the 2.588
million years and draw that dotted line
up, you can see where those two clusters
would have been at the time. So the
centurus scorpius association is one of
these OB associations. OB because it
contains O and Bclass massive stars.
lots and lots of gas, lots of uh star
forming clouds and uh areas, lots of
dust, but several thousand massive
stars, including the massive star
Antares.
So, 420 light years away and around
about 11 to 15 million years old, this
cluster. And so that works out quite
nicely because the massive stars, the
really big O and upper Bclass stars
born that long ago would have been
exploding through the period that we are
considering.
The really massive Oclass stars perhaps
live only a million years and the other
end of things is around 10 million. And
so these stars would have been coming to
the end of their short lives and
detonating as core collapse type 2
supernovi around about the period of the
plyiosene
and those radionuclei could well have
then been coming to earth and triggering
off all of these biological changes.
The other group, the Takana horolog
and it's older, so 230 light years, but
45 to 50 million years old.
So in fact, all the most massive stars
would have detonated long ago. And what
we see now in this group are only the
remaining lower power, lower mass stars,
the lower end of the Bclass, the A and F
stars that live longer. But gradually
the the heavier end of the remainder are
coming to the end of their lives and
detonating all the time. So we get a
declining series of supernovi um as
these smaller and smaller stars are
blowing up and maybe these two were
associated with flooding the earth with
such things.
But there is another intriguing
discovery which is that the researchers
have found the isotope of the element
plutonium plutonium 244 in the deep sea
sediments. So, not only do we have the
iron 60 that we strongly associate with
the type 2 core collapse supernovi,
but plutonium as well. And this is more
likely to be produced not in a core
collapse of a giant star, but in a
merger of a pair of neutron stars. If
two neutron stars crash into each other,
you get a humongous explosion called a
kilo noa and a blizzard of neutrons
again it radiates out through the
explosion
triggering the growth of heavier and
heavier nuclei all the way up through
lead up through plutonium
and even to elements much more exotic
than that. And this then of course uh
the short-lived ones have decayed a long
time ago. So the only ones that we see
are the ones with relatively long half
lives where we're actually able to still
find a noticeable amount. And plutonium
244 fits that bill perfectly. So maybe
this was not a supernova but a kilonova.
And we are discovering that actually
kilonova are probably responsible for
about half the gold in your rings or in
your teeth wherever you happen to have
it. So uh becoming more and more
important to the study of the synthesis
of heavy elements.
So thanks very much an intriguing
possibility. I don't think this is
proven. I think this is the beginning of
the story and I think there's a lot more
research to be done. That's one of the
things I love about astronomy is we're
finding new stuff all the time. So,
thanks very much for listening.